When Şītā, having a husband although seeming as if she had none, was putting on the ascetic guise, the people got into a wrath and exclaimed, “O Dasaratha, fie on you!"
If, O wicked woman, Rāma has happened to do you something unbeautiful, what wrong, O base wretch, has Vaidehi done you in the world?
Of eyes expanded like those of a doe, endued with a mild temperament, and virtuous, what harm has Janaka's daughter done you.
Surely, O nefarious one, the banishment of Ráma is enough for you. Why then do you bend your mind to perpetrate these atrocious sins?
O noble dame, having heard you asking for the banishment of Rāma, who had at first been intended by me for being installed, and who came here afterwards, I had promised you (his exile alone.)
But since, going beyond that promise of mine, you behold Mithala's daughter dressed in mendicant garb, surely you wish to find your way to hell.
Thus commissioned to the forest, Räma who was seated sealing his lips, said.
Hearing those bold words of the ascetic, the son of that foremost of men, Rāghava firm in his vows, with clasped hands answered.
Therefore, commanded by that upholder of the Veda, I, agreeably to my father's mandate, will, without doubt, bring about that welcome event-the death of Tataka.
And in the interests of Brāhmaṇas, kine, and celestials, I am ready to act as desired by you of immeasurable energy.
And rendered almost insensible by anger, that Räksasī furiously rushed in a main towards the spot whence had come the report.
Behold, O Laksmana, the terrible and hideous body of yonder Yakṣiṇī! The sight of her strike terror into the hearts of even the brave.
As Rāma was speaking thus, Tāțakā, deprived of sense through ire, uttering roars, with uplifted arms rushed against him.
And thereat the Brahmarsi, Visvāmitra, uttering a roar, upbraided her, and said, Svasti!* May victory attend the descendants of Raghu! *A particle of benediction, indeclinable.
And raising thick clouds of dust, Tāțakā instantly bewildered both the descendants of Raghu.
And then by help of illusion, she began to pour upon them a mighty shower of crags. And thereat Raghu's descendant was wroth.
And resisting that mighty shower of crags by vollies of shafts, Rāghava with arrows cut off her hands.
They surveyed all around in the forest-land, deer ranging fearlessly at large and grazing on tender grass.
They proceeding quickly, Rama, the descendant of Raghu, beholding the forest filled with trees, spoke to Sugrīva, saying.
By virtue of their asceticism, this asylum is walled by trees and incapable of being conquered even by Indra, the celestials and the Asuras.
Birds or other wild animals do not enter this asylum; whoever entereth this by mistake never returneth.
There resteth no sin in their persons, O Rāma, who bow to those self-controlled Saints.
Thereupon Rāma, along with his younger brother Lakşmaņa, made obeisance to those high-souled ones.
Having paid homage (to the sacred memory of those great ones) the virtuous-souled Rāma his (younger) brother Laksmana, Sugriva and other monkeys, proceeded with delighted hearts.
And wending a distant way from that hermitage of the seven great ones, they beheld Kişkindhä, hard to conquer and occupied by Vali.
All the mighty Rākşasas of grim visages, whom you have extolled (before me), shall be deprived of their venom before Rāma, as serpents are before Suparna,
The shafts decorated with gold shot by the bow-string of Rāghava, shall pierce their bodies, as the waves of the Ganga (beat against) her banks.
The strong Rāghava will compass the end of what remains of your life. Like the life of a beast tied to the sacrificial stake, your own is incapable of being reclaimed.
Should Rāma look at you with eyes aglow with anger, you, O Raksasa, would be consumed even as Manmatha was by, Rudra.
Your days are numbered, and auspiciousness has bidden you adieu. You are shorn of strength, and your senses have been dulled. And it is owing to you that Larkā shall be subject to widowhood.
Through my grace, he shall along with his forces cross over the ocean. And, O excellent wench, I have by my supernal power, stupified the Raksasis.
And, O Sita, for this reason, I along with sleep, taking these rice, rice boiled in clarified butter, have, O Vaidehi, corne to you.
If you partake of these from my hand, you shall never O beauteous one, be afflicted either with hunger or thirst, O you of thighs resembling rambhā (trunks), for years.
Thus addressed, Sītā, alarmed, said, How can I know you for Devendra, Saci's husband, staying here?
If, O lord of Raksasas, you relish my speech, do you then, O Ravana, without fear, do as I tell you.
Understanding their incapacity, do you, O lord of Rākṣasas, for making her your wife, by force carry away the frail Sītā of a blameless person.
That virtuous one does not know that to-day I have become helpless and been widowed. Răma of eyes resembling lotus-petals has living been removed from my sight.
And raising their arms, with tears trickling down their faces, they in dire affliction and extremely exercised with grief, lamented.
O monarch, why do you forsake us, who have been already deprived of Rāma ever speaking fair and firm in promise?
Renounced by Rāma, how shall we, rendered widows, stay with the wicked Kaikeyi, co-wife with us?
The roarings of the lions living in the caves of mountains, swelling with the sounds of the water-falls, produce a very painful impression upon the ears; so the wood is full of misery.
Being exhausted with the toil of the day, the dwellers of the wood have to sleep in night on the bed made of leaves fallen from the trees on the surface of the ground; so the wood is full of misery.
With the (supply of) fruits that have fallen from the trees man of self discipline must content himself morning and evening; so the wood, O Sītă, is full of misery.
Reptiles, many and of various kinds, creep there on the path, O excellent lady, with haughtiness; so the wood is full of misery.
And snakes living in the rivers and of crooked course like them, always await the wayfarers, hindering the passers-by: so the wood is full of misery.
Birds, scorpions, insects mosquito's and wild gnats, always disturb the dwellers, O fair one' of the weaker sex; so the wood is full misery.
Being enveloped with darkness and having their senses bewildered the celestials killed their own kith and the Rākṣasas their own men, and others fled away.
Thinking that Jayanta was slain all the deities greatly sorry and distressed fled away on all sides.
Not beholding his son and observing the flight of the deities the king of the celestials said to Mātali, “Bring the car."
(And he having) ascended the car, the huge clouds, with lightening, being driven by winds, began to emit forth loud mutterings before the chariot.
The Gandharvas began to play on various instruments and the Apsarās began to dance.
Surrounded by demons and night-rangers and with the celestial car he encountered Mahendra in the battle-field.
Having desisted his son he himself stood there. And having coming out from the field of action Ravana's son too stood silent.
Thereupon there arose an encounter between the Räkşasas and the deities and there began a downpour of weapons in the conflict like clouds.
The vicious-souled Kumbhakarņa armed with various weapons came you, but he did not know,* O king, with whom the conflict was going on. *For he was asleep till then so he was not acquainted with the particulars war-fare. He used to sleep for six months at a time.
And by him enraged, the celestials were assailed with his teeth, feet, arms, hands, Saktis, Tomaras and clubs or any weapon whatsoever.
Thereupon the night-ranger engaged with the highly powerful Rudra and was wounded, in the conflict, with incessant strokes of weapons.
Thereupon the Rākşasas army began to fight with Maruts and they were overwhelmed in the encounter with the stroke of various weapons.
Or do you speedily repair for I do not wish to see the hated and relentless Kaikeyi, who has brought this calamity upon me.
Having spoken thus, the kind conversant with the duties of Sovereigns again endeavoured to propitiate Kaikeyī, saying.
O noble dame, do you show favour to me, who am of honest ways, who am distressed, who have made myself yours, who have finished his life, and who, in especial, am your king.
That I have spoken you thus was because, O you of shapely hips, I had been deprived of my senses (through grief). O girl, do you show your favour to me, be generous, be propitious.
Let my Rāma obtain the kingdom in fact conferred by you. Thereupon, O you having the outer corner of your eyes of dark blue hue, you will attain high fame (among men.)
O you of well-developed hips, do you do this act of benefit to me and Ráma and the people and the superiors, and Bharata.
Having heard the exceedingly piteous words of her husband, the king of pure sentiment, who was distressed, with his eye rendered coppery and flowing with tears, that wicked minded and merciless woman spoke not.
The heroic Nalabest of monkeys, is the son of Viśvakarmă. And powerful and impetuous, Durdhara is the son of Vasu.
Thus have I described to you the entire monkey host stationed in mount Suvela. As for what remain to be done, you are the master.
Hearing those words of the intelligent Kusanābha, his hundred daughters touching his feet with their heads, said
And Mārica wearing the shape of a deer, showing himself and disappearing from sight, drew Rāghava a long way from the hermitage.
Thereat Rāma, eagerly anxious to secure the deer, being foiled by the deer, and in consequence growing enraged, wearied out, rested under a shadow, on a sward.
And that ranger of the night, wearing the form of a deer, maddening Rāma, discovered himself (again) at a distance surrounded by (other) deer,
Hearing those words the deities said What you have said shall be carried out. Do what you wish.
There upon the celestials, delighted, adored their Chief divested of sins and crowned with victory.
And Väsava being installed again on the throne, the whole universe was at rest. There upon Indra worshipped Vişnu in the shape of that wonderful sacrifice.
O descendant of Raghu, such is the power of a horse-sacrifice. O honourable king, therefore, you may perform this sacrifice.
There upon the great saint said:-Hear, O king, O you gifted with great energy, for what I have come here. O you of great strength, the great Patriarch has sent me to you.
Tell me, O Akampana, has Rāma come to Janasthāna, accompanied with the sovereign of the celestials and the body of the immortals?
Again hearing Rāvana's words, Akampana described the strength and energy of that highsouled one.
When he had said this, Akampana said, He ar, O king, the true report of Rāma's prowess and manliness.
The Raksasas, inspired with martial ardour, put on diverse garlands, consecrated with scriptural formulae; and donned on their armour.
And furnished with their boys and wearing their armour, the Rākşasas, on seeing king Ravana, leaving (their vehicles), stood, surrounding Prahasta.
And on that general of the forces marching, sounds of conchs were heard (all around); and the Rākşasas of dreadful forms and huge bodies, going before Prahasta, advanced, emitting tremendous roars.
Narāntaka, Kumbhahunu, Mahānāda, and Samunnata Prahasta's counsellors all of themwent on, surrounding him.
'O friend, we ought not to take anything: ours is always to give.'
And in that bed lay down Rāma in company with Sītā. Next washing their feet, Lakşmaņa turned away.
This is the foot of the Ingudī, and this that grass. On it both Rāma and Sītā lay down that night.
Fastening on his back a pair of quivers filled with arrows furnished with finger-fences, and taking his mighty bow, Lakşmaņa all night kept watch around.
I also taking an excellent bow, remained where remained Lakṣmaṇa, and surrounded by my kindred who stayed there vigilantly, equipped with bows, guarded him that resembled the mighty Indra.
Hearing of the arrival of the Bharata with the army Gargya and Yudhajit, the king of Kekayas, were greatly delighted.
There upon the highly powerful and lightarmed Bharata and Yudhājit, with the soldiers and followers, arrived at the city of Gandharvas.
Having heard of the coming of Bharata the highly powerful Gandharvas gathered round and sent up leonine roars.
There upon began the battle capable of making down erect and continued for a week. On neither side there was victory or defeat.
Alighting from the car, Hanumān possessed of vigorous activity, leader of monkeybands-nearing the wall, looked like lightning within a mass of clouds.
Striving after Rāma's welfare, I have again searched through Lankā; but I do not see Vaidehi's daughter, Janaki, having all her limbs endeued with loveliness.
The vulture-king Sampati had told that Sītā was in the mansion of Rāvaņa. But why do I not see her (here)?
While they were thus thinking, Indra, of thousand eyes, taking up a thunderbolt, hurled it against Vrtra's head.
That dreadful burning thunderbolt, like to the fire of dissolution, falling on Vrtra's head, the three worlds were agitated.
There upon thinking that he has perpetrated an iniquity by slaying Vịtra engaged in asceticism, Indra, out of fear, fled to the other side of Lokāloka mountain, perpetually enshrouded with darkness.
And the sin, consequent upon the destruction of a Brahmana, pursuing him vehemently, entered into his person. In this wise Indra became subject to dreadful afflictions.
Before him went the councillors and priests, ascending cars resembling that of the Sun yoked with steeds.
And a thousand elephants duly consecrated went in the wake of that son of the Ikşvāku line as he was proceeding.
And six thousand with bow-men furnished with various weapons followed the illustrious prince Bharata as he was proceeding.
And a hundred thousand horses mounted (by riders) went in the wake of that descendant of Raghu intent upon truth and having his senses under control.
Kaikeyi and Sumitrā and the highly famous Kausalyā rejoicing at the prospect of the bringing of Rāma, went in an effulgent car. cars
And the honourable persons (belonging to all the three orders) went with the object of beholding Rāma in company with Lakşmaņa.
They with glad hearts variously conversed with each other, “When shall we see the mighty armed Rāma sable like to a cloud, of steady strength, firm in vows, the remover of the world's grief?
As soon as we shall see him, Rāghava will remove our sorrow; even as the Sun arising dispels the darkness of the entire world.
Thus cheerfully carrying on an auspicious talk, the citizens embracing each other went along.
And all other, and the foremost merchants as well as all the principal classes, joyfully went in quest of Rāma.
Thereupon by means of shafts the righteous Rāghava resisted that mighty destructive shower of trees and stones.
Resisting that shower, Rāma with his eyes staring and resembling a bull, flew into a great rage, for the purpose of slaying the whole body of Raksasas.
Then influenced by wrath, and flaming in energy, he on all sides covered the army along with Düşana with arrows.
Then the general, Dusana, destroyer of enemies, getting wroth, opposed Rāghava with arrows resembling thunderbolts.
And that apartment, in consequence of being graced by those women, appeared splendid, like the autumnal, complacent sky decorated with the stars.
And surrounded by them, the Rākṣasa chief resembled the fair Moon encircled by the stars.
“Those stars that drop from the firmament on their virtue deteriorating, have assembled here in a body," thus thought the monkey at that time.
And the shine, form, and splendour of those females resembled, forsooth those of magnificently displayed, noble and lustrous stars.
And on account of their having been bereft of consciousness through sleep, induced by fatigue brought on by drink (and dance), their hair was dishevelled, and their full wreaths and goodly ornaments lay scattered about.
And some of those paragons had got their beauty-spots, smudged; and some, their bangles loosening off, some, their chains running to one side.
And others had their pearl necklaces burst, and their cloths getting away (from their persons), and the chains of their zones straying irregularly; resembling way-worn mares.
And others again were without their ear-rings, and had their garlands torn and crushed; and resembled blossoming creepers, trodden down in a vast forest by mighty elephants.
And the pearl chains of some shining females resembling moon beams, having got topsy-turvy, was lying like sleeping swans between the breasts of the damsels.
And the lapis chains of some resembled water-crows;* and the fine golden chains turned upside down of other appeared like ruddy geese. *Kadamba-a drake; or, according to some, a teal; a gander; or the species gallinula porphyria.
And those ladies resembled rivers having hips for banks; containing swans and Karandavas, and beautified with ruddy geese.
Those sleeping females appeared like streams; having Kinkiņis for their ripples; and large gold lotuses;* marks* of amorous encounter on their persons for ferocious aquatic animals; and perfections,** for their banks. 'i.e. the faces of the females are meant. Another meaning is, gold for large lotuses. *Vilasa, may also mean arch displays by way of ecquetry. **Yasa, according to some, here means grace.
On the tender frames, as well as on the tops of the breasts, of graceful scratches consequent pressure, appeared like ornaments.
The scarf-ends of some stirred by the air that some on was blowing about their faces, flapped on them again and again.
At the nether part of the faces of Rāvana's wives, they (the scarf-ends) appeared beauteous like uplifted streamers of exceeding elegance, composed of many-hued golden yarn.
The ear-rings of some dames possessed of a pleasant sheen, stirred by the air that was breathing about their faces, were undulating gently.
The sweet breath of their faces, naturally fragrani, and redolent of sugar and asava, was then rogaling Rāvana.
Out of fear sprung from sleep and intoxication, some of Rāvana's wives were again and again smelling the faces of those, co-wives with them, taking the faces to belong to Rāvaņa.
From their hearts being firmly fixed on Ravana, those excellent women, having their sense of separateness removed, (albeit thus dealt with), did what was dear to them.* *The sense is very imperspicusous only by reason of he unskilful use of the pronouns. The damsels kissed did not resent the act; but kissed the kissers in turn.
Other females, making their gay scarf-ends (for their sheets), and making their arms, their pillows, were lying down there.
And some were lying on others' bosoms; and others again, on the arms of the latter. And some lay on the laps of others; and others, again, on the breasts of the latter.
They reposed on each other's thighs, flanks, waists, and backs; and coming under the influence of wine and amour, they lay on each other's persons.
Hearing the words of the ascetic, Laksmana, the slayer of enemies worshipping the feet of that high-souled one, said.
O illustrious Sir, kindly mention your business. What is your object? Order me what I am to do. Råma is engaged in some business so kindly wait here for some time.
Hearing those words that foremost of Rșis, red eyes:
Hearing those dreadful and resolute words of the Rşis, Lakşmaņa thought within himself.
My own destruction is far more desirable than that of all. Having thus resolved Lakşmaņa approached Rāma and communicated to him the intelligence.
Hearing the words of Lakşmaņa and having bade adieu, to Kala, Rama soon came out and saw Atri's son.
And having saluted that great and powerful ascetic he with folded hands, said. What is your business.
Hearing the words of Rāma, the highly powerful Durvāsā, the foremost of Munis, said. Hear, O Rāma fond of virtue.
For a thousand years I have carried on the vow of fasting. It has terminated today, so do you give me food as much as possible.
Hearing those words Rāma was greatly delighted and gave proper food to that ascetic.
And feasting on that nectar-like sweet food, Durvāsā, the foremost of Rşis, thanked Rāma and repaired to his own hermitage.
Beholding Lankā burnt down and devastated and the demons terrified, the monkey Hanumān began to reflect.
And worked up with fear and remorse, he reflected, “What a mighty iniquity have I perpetrated by burning down Lankā of my own accord.
Blessed are those high-souled ones who control their wrath by dint of their own good sense, like to fire quenched by water.
What iniquity is there which cannot be perpetrated by the angry? They can even slay the worshipful and vilify the pious with harsh words.
The angry cannot decide what should be spoken and what not. There is no vice which cannot be committed by them, and there is nothing which cannot be spoken by them.
He is the proper person who can subdue his rising ire by means of forgiveness as a serpent leaves off his worn skin.
O fie on me who am vicious-minded, shameless and the perpetrator of a mighty iniquity. Not thinking of Sītā, I have slain my master with fire.
Forsooth has the worshipful Jảnaki been burnt, since the whole city of Lankā has been devastated with fire. And she being burnt, foolishly have I spoilt the work of my master.
I have defeated the great object for which I have laboured so much. In burning down Lankā, I have not saved Sītā.
Cover thick shall I the field of battle and make it impassable by cutting asunder the trunks of the elephants, thighs of the horses and heads of the infantry.
Being beheaded by my swords like to the flaming fire and besmeared with blood resembling the clouds with lightning, my enemies shall fall down to the ground.
Who is there, proud of his own prowess, that ! shall be able to withstand me when I shall appear at the battle field with bows and leathern fences of fingers.
Killing one with a number of arrows, and sometimes many with a single one, I shall drive shafts into the vital organs of men, horses and elephants.
Today shall I display my skill in arms in destroying the supremacy of the monarch and establishing you.
Are you that Sītā, I do ask you, who had been stolen and borne away by Rāvana from Janasthāna? May good betide you!
From your wretched plight, your unrivalled beauty and your ascetic garb, you are, I ween, for certain, the queen of Rāma.
Hearing those words of Hanumān and greatly delighted at Rāma's name, Vaidehī spoke to him.
Having offered his obeisance to Räma and Lakşmaņa the powerful Hanumān, greatly delighted in seeing Sītā, remained there hidden.
Beholding those two high-souled brothers Rāma and Lakşmaņa, heroic and with great scimitars in their hands, Sugrīva became terrified.
That best of monkeys, of a disturbed mind, cast his looks around and could not stand (patiently) at any place.
Beholding those two of great prowess he could not make up his mind to remain there and the heart of that terrified monkey, sank.
Pondering over what is more and what is less important the virtuous-souled Sugrīva became highly anxious along with that monkey-herd.
Beholding Rāma and Laksmana, Sugriva, the king of monkeys, greatly exercised with anxiety spoke to his counsellors, saying.
Forsooth, these two heroes, in false guises and wearing bark, despatched by Vāli, have come here traversing the forest stronghold.
Beholding these two mighty archers the counsellors of Sugriva, quitting that mountainous expanse proceeded to another best of hills.
Thereupon proceeding quickly the commanders of various monkey herds stood encircling the king of monkeys and the chief of · leaders.
O king, having warred savagely for five days, the Brahmana (Drona) endued with great strength, fell and repaired to the region of Brahma.
The fruits that arise from a study of the Vedas, arise from the reading of this Parvan also. The great achievements of brave Kshatriyas have bee described here.
He, who reads or hears the recitation of this Parvan everyday is released from a great sins and the most wicked acts of his life.
While Dhritarashtra was saying this. Vidura was seen at a distance. He had matted locks on his head, and gravel's in his mouth, and was greatly emaciated. He was perfectly naked. his body was besmeared all over with fifth, and with the dust of various wild flowers,
When Kshatta, was seen from a distance, the fact was communicated to Yudhishthira. Vidura suddenly stopped, O king, loO king towards the retreat.
King Yudhishthira pursued him alone, as he ran and entered the deep forest, sometimes seen and sometimes not seen by the pursuer.
He said aloud, 'O Vidura, O Vidura, I am king Yudhishthira, your favourite-Exclaiming thus, Yudhishthira, with great exertion, followed Vidura.
Having reached a solitary spot in the forest that foremost of intelligent men, viz., Vidura, stood still, learning against a tree.
He was greatly emaciated. He retained only the shape of a human being. Yudhishthira of great intelligence recognised him, however.
Standing before him, Yudhishthira addressed him saying, 'I am Yudhishthira.' Indeed, adoring Vidura properly., Yudhishthira said these words in the hearing of Vidura.
Meanwhile Vidura looked at the king steadfastly. Casting his look thus on the king, he stood motionless in Yoga.
Endued with great intelligence, he then (by his Yoga-power) entered the body of Yudhishthira, limb by limb. He united his vital airs with those of the king, and his senses with the king's senses.
Indeed, with the help of Yoga-power, Vidura, burning with energy, thus entered the body of king Yudhishthira the just.
Meanwhile the body of Vidura continued to lean against the tree with eyes fixed. The king soon saw that life had fled out of it.
The only boon that I ask for, O lord, is that I may have a grandson by her.” Having taken that girl with them Galava with the bird,
And saying "we see you again” went away. Saying: “The means for obtaining the horses has now been gained," the one born of an egg too
Went away, after for the permission of Galava, to his own place. And the king of birds having gone away Galava along with that maiden,
Began to think about the king who could offer suitable dowry for her and in his mind decided to go to that best among the kingsHaryashva, of the race of Ikshvaku.
He ruled over Ayodhya, was endued with great over Ayodhya, was endued with great prowess and had an army with four divisions and had also in his possession enough of treasures and coins, who was dear to his subject and to whom the twice born were also dear,
Who desirous of the peace of his subjects was practicing excellent austerities. The regenerate Rishi Galava, Having approached him, Haryashva, said to him:
"This girl in my possession, O chief among kings, increases a race by bringing forth children, O Haryashva; accept her by offering a dowry. I shall describe to you what dowry, to offer and hearing that you decide it."
(Having arrived at that lake), Shvetavahana beheld his two brothers, those most valiant of men, who came to fetch water, lying dead.
And that lion amongst men, beholding them as if buried in slumber, became very afflicted, And then the son of Kunti upraising his bow looked around that forest.
But he beheld no creature in that great forest. And oppressed with fatigue, Savyasachi made for the water.
And as he rushed (towards the water) he heard these words from the firmament “Why are you coming towards the water You will not। be able to drink of it forcibly.
O son of Kunti, O Bharata, if you can answer the questions put by me, then you may drink of the water and take it away.”
Thus forbidden, Partha said "come to my presence and then prevent me. You will not speak again in this strain when I will rive you with darts."
Saying this, Partha displaying his skill in hitting at an invisible object by sound alone, entirely covered all the sides by discharges of arrows inspired with the mantras,
O best of the Bharatas, oppressed with thirst, he began to hurl barbed darts, javelins, Narachas and numerous infallible arrows.
And he discharged at the firmament innumerable darts.
The Yaksha said: Partha, your exertions are to no purpose, (First) answer my questions and then drink
Beautiful, variously formed, decked with many coloured ear-rings, children of Airavata, you shine like the sun in the sky.
These are many settlements of Nagas on the northern banks of the Ganges and there do I often worship the great Nagas.
Who but Airavata can desire to move in the burning sun? When Dhritarashtra goes out, twenty eight thousand and eight Nagas follow him.
I salute you all that have Airavata for their elder brother, whether you live near him or stay at a distance from him.
In order to get beck my ear-rings I worship you, Takshaka, the Naga-king, who formerly lived in Kurukshetra and the forest of Khandhava.
1 Takshaka and Ashvasena were constant companions when they lived in Kurukshetra on the banks of the river Ikshumati.
Who was unoffending, but who died like a tree stricken by thunder, having been bitten by this vile serpent.
The worst of the serpent race, Takshaka, being intoxicated with power, committed a wicked act when he bit your father.
Wicked in his deeds, he even made Kashyapa run away when he was coming for the relief of your god-like father, the protector of the race of royal sages.
Trembling with faintness, the black-eyed lady supported her with her thighs and with her plump and becoming arms.
Thus trying to support herself with her thighs which were like the trunk of an elephant, she suddenly fell down on the ground, trembling like a plantain tree stirred (by wind).
From your own fault, and from that of your son, ruler of men, this great and dreadful destruction ( of the creature of) the earth has come to pass, adding considerably to the population of Death's kingdom.
It behooves your not. O king, to grieve for what has come to pass in consequence of your own faults. The kings do not pay any the least regard to their lives in this battle.
The rulers of men (assembled on the filed), desire to attain to the regions of those that perform pious acts. always cherishing a desire for attaining paradise, they are fighting agitating the hostile army.
That afternoon, O mighty monarch a great destruction of creatures took place. Hear of me, with singleness of attention of that battle that ras.
In that fierce fight, as the troops slew one another, a terrible river started up into existence on the field of battle, of which the waves and currents were formed of blood.
Having brought jewels from Bindu lake, Maya built a lake-like ground made of crystal. O descendant of Bharata, seeing the place full of lotuses, I mistook it for waster.
Seeing me draw up my clothes, Vrikodara (Bhima) laughed at me, considering me as destitute of jewels and deprived of my reason at the affluence of the enemy.
The Individual Soul and the universe are said to both partake of Nature characterised by the three qualities of Goodness, Darkness, and Ignorance. The Supreme Soul is different from both the Individual Soul and the universe.
As the seasons, though having no forms, are nevertheless inferred from the appearance of particular fruits and flowers, similarly, Nature, though formless, is inferred from the Principles of Greatness and the rest that originate from it.
Thus, from the existence of Consciousness in body, the Supreme Soul, shorn of all qualities whatever and perfectly stainless, is inferred.
Without beginning and destruction, without end, the seer of all things, and auspicious, that Soul, only on account of its Oneness with the body and other qualities, comes to be taken as invested with qualities.
Those persons who are truly conversant with qualities know that only objects endued with qualities can have attributes but that That which is above all qualities can have none.
When the Individual Soul conquers all qualities born of Nature and which it assumes under mistake, only then does it see the Supreme Soul.
All the rank growth must be cut off; O Bharata, look at the proofs; peace with the sons of Pandu is more to your interest than union with wicked people.
Living in peace with them you will succeed in all your objects enjoying the territories built up by the sons of Pandu, O best among kings,
Keeping the sons of Pandu behind you, you repose your hopes for safety on other sources, namely on Dushasana, Durvisha, Karna and the son of Subala.
Reposing your kingly prosperity on them you wish for prosperity, O Bharata; but these friends of yours have not sufficient knowledge of virtue of worldly profit.
Those, who have a voice like a deer, and eyes like those of the leopard or the bull, are highly active. Those, whose voice is like that of bells, are excitable, wicked, and wrathful.
Those, who have a voice deep like the muttering of the clouds, who have angry faces or faces like those of camels, those who have hooked noses and tongues, are gifted with great speed and can shoot or hurl their weapons to a great distance.
Those, who have bodies curved like that of the cat, and thin hair and thin skin are gifted with great speed and restlessness, and are almost invincible in battle.
Regarding it is cited the old story of the conversation between Mrityu and Gautami with Kala and the Fowler and the serpent.
There was, O son of Kunti, an old lady named Gautami, who was endued with great patience and peace of mind. One day she found her son dead on account of having been bitten by a serpent.
An angry fowler, named Arjunaka, bound the serpent with a string and brought it before Gautami.
He then said to her. This wretched serpent has been the cause of your son's death. O blessed lady! Tell me quickly how this wretch is to be killed!
Shall I throw it into the fire or shall I cut it into pieces? This infamous killer of a child should not live longer!
Having obtained for wife the daughter of Gadhi and your granddaughter, O king, that great ascetic will beget a twiceborn son gifted with Kshatriya accomplishments.
In your race will be born a son, a Kshatriya gifted with the virtues of a Brahmana. Possessed of great virtue, he will be the son of Gadhi. Known by the name of Vishvamitra, he will in energy come to be considered as the equal of Brihaspati himself, the preceptor of the celestials.
The illustrious Richika will grant this son to your race, this Kshatriya who will be endued with high penances. Two women will be the cause in the matter of this exchange of sons.
One that the tenth day of the battle, O foremost of the Bharatas, from among the Matsyas and the Panchalas, Bhishma, single handed,
Having slain ten thousand elephants, slew also seven mighty car-warriors. Then the great grandsire also five thousand car-warriors.
In that fierce battle in addition to all this, fourteen thousand foot-soldiers, one thousand elephants, and ten thousand steeds.
Fought a fearful battle with Bhima without any arms. Seeing the feat of that illustrious (king), Bhimasena installed installed the mighty Sudharma as the generalissimo (of his army).
O king, causing the earth itself to tremble with the tread of the mighty army that followed him, then Bhima of fearful velour marched towards the east.
O king, that hero, the foremost of all mighty men, then defeated in battle Rochaman, the king of Ashvamedha, with all his troops.
Having vanquished that king by performing feats that excelled in fierceness, the greatly powerful descendant of Kuru subjugated the eastern region.
He then went to the south in the great city of the Pulindas and subjugated Sukumara and the king Sumitra.
O Janamejaya, then at the command of Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, that best of the Bharata race marched against the greatly powerful Shishupala.
The loud sound of their instruments, mingled with the blare of conchs, is fearful to the ear, and carried by the winds, is filling all the points of the horizon.
Loud also is the neighing of their steeds and the grunting of their elephants and the roaring of their warriors.
That defending noise made by the rejoicing warriors as they are going to their quarters, as also the clatter of their car-wheels, comes to us from the east.
So great has been the havoc made by the Pandavas on the Dhartarashtras that we three are the only survivors.
Some were gifted with the strength of a hundred elephants and some were masters of all weapons. Yet they have been killed by the son of Pandu. I consider this to be an instance of the reverses caused by Destiny.
Truly, this is the end of which such acts leads. Although the Pandavas have achieved such difficult feats, yet this should be the result of those feats.
If you have not lost your wisdom out of stupefaction, then say what is proper for us to do under these circumstances.
Horsemen on fleet horses with tails like the plumes of swans, rushed upon me another.
Hurled by them, long fleet and polished and sharp-pointed darts, decked with gold, fell (on all sides) like so many snakes.
Some heroic horsemen on fleet steeds leaped up and cut off the heads of car-warriors who were seated on their cars.
A car-warrior, getting a body cavalry within shooting distance, killed many with straight arrows furnished with broad heads.
Many infuriated elephants adorned with gold trappings and loO king like newly-risen clouds threw down the horses and crushed them with their legs.
Being struck on their frontal globes and flanks, and mangled by lances, many elephants roared aloud in great agony.
In the bewildering confusion of the melee, many elephants threw steeds with their riders and crushed them down.
Overthrowing with their tusks steeds and their riders, some elephants roved about and crushed cars with their standards.
The trees there bear sweet fruits, and are always covered with flowers and fruits. All the flowers are of the sweetest fragrance and all the fruits are of the best taste.
O king, some of the trees produce fruits as one desires to cat. There are some trees that are called "Milk-yielding".
They always produce milk and the six different kinds of food with the taste of ambrosia. They also produce cloths, and their fruits are ornaments.
The whole ground is covered with gems and golden sands. A certain part of this region which is extremely delightful is seen to be as radiant as the ruby or the diamond or the Vaidurya gem or other jewels or of the hue of the lotus. O king, all the seasons there are charming, and no part of its ground ever for comes miry.
Its tanks are charming, delicious and full of pure water. The men born there have all come down from the land of the celestial.
All are of pure birth and all are exceedingly handsome. Husband and wife are born there and women there are like the Apsaras in beauty.
They drink the milk of these “Milkyielding” trees which is as sweet as the ambrosia. The pair grow up there equally.
O king, they, both possessing equal beauty, both possessing equal virtues, both wearing equal dresses, grow up in great love like a pair of Chakravakas (birds).
Such things had never happened, not even during the war between the Devas and the Danavas. The winds blew with thunder; meteors fell in thousands;
The cloudless sky made a tremendous roar. Even he who was the god of the gods, dropped blood,
The garlands in the necks of the celestials grew pale and dim and their splendour was lost. And terrible masses of clouds vomited thick showers of blood.
One hundred kings of the name of Dhritarashtra, eighty of the name of Janamejaya, one hundred of the name of Brahmadatta, one of the name of Viri and Iri,
Two hundred Bhishmas, one hundred Bhimas, one hundred Prativindhya, one hundred Nagas, and one hundred Hayas.
One hundred Palashas, one hundred Kashas, and Kushas, the king of kings, Shantanu, your father Pandu.
Ushangava, Shataratha, Devaraja, Jayadratha, the wise royal sage Vrishadarbha with his ministers.
One thousand others of the name of Shashabindu who have died after performing many great horse sacrifices with large Dakshinas;
O king of kings, these holly royal sages, all of great achievements and great knowledge of the Shastras, waited upon the of Vaivasvata, (Yama) in that assembly-hall.
The food which is bitter, sour, salted, overhot, pungent, dry and burning, and which produces pain, grief and disease, is desired by a man of Raja temperament.
The food which is cold, not savory, stinky, corrupt, filthy and a refuse, is liked by men of Tama.
Sattva Sacrifice is which being prescribed by the Shastras, is performed by a man who desires no fruit from it, and who performs it by believing it to be only a duty.
But O chief son of Bharata, Raja Sacrifice is that which is performed in expectation of receiving fruits from it and for ostentatious show.
And Tama sacrifice is that which is performed against the ordinances of the Shastras in which food is not distributed, Mantras are not recited, fees are not paid to the assisting priests and which is void of faith.
Reverence to Celestial, regenerate ones, preceptors, and learned men, and purity, uprightness, the practices of a Brahmachary, and abstention from injury, constitute the penance of body.
The words that does not disturb any body and which is agreeable, true and beneficial, and the diligent study of the Vedas, is the penance of speech.
Serenity of mind, gentleness, taciturnity, self restraint, and purity of disposition, constitute the penance of mind.
Now Sattva Penance is that in which this three-fold penance is performed with perfect faith, with devotion and without the desire for fruit.
Raja Penance is that which is performed with hypocrisy for gaining respect honour, and revenue, and which is unstable and transient.
Tama Penance is that which is performed under a deluded belief, and with torture of one's self, and for the destruction of another,
As soon as the child was placed on his lap, his extra arms fell down and the eye on his forehead disappeared.
Seeing this, the queen became alarmed and aggrieved, she begged Krishna to grant her a boon. (She said), O mighty armed hero, I am afflicted with fear; grant me a boon.
You are the assuager of all men afflicted with grief; you are the dispeller of every body's fear". Having been thus addressed, the : descendant of Yadu, Krishna replied.
"O lady, do not be alarmed. O virtuous queen, you have no fear from me. O aunt, what boon shall I give you? What shall I do?
Whether I am able or not, I shall do what you will say." Having been thus addressed, she thus spoke to the descendant of Yadu, Krishna.
"O greatly powerful hero, O best of the Yadu race, you will have to pardon for my sake the offence committed by Shishupala. O lord, know, this is the boon I ask”.
Beholding those two enraged heroes strike one another in battle, the younger brothers of Duryodhana, all of whom were ready to lay down lives their in battle.
Bearing in mind their pre-concerted plan of afflicting Bhima of fierce deeds, began with an earnest determination, to strike him (from all sides).
Then the highly powerful Bhima beholding them make towards himself in battle, O monarch, rushed against them like an elephants encountering his compeers.
Then excited to fury, that hero endued with great fame and energy, afflicted your son Chitrasena, O monarch, with a long shaft.
Then in that conflict, O king, the descendant of the Bharata race smote your other sons with diverse kinds of arrows furnished with golden wings and charged with great impetus.
Then those twelve mighty car-warrior including Abhimanyu and others, arranging their troops in proper order,
And being dispatched by the very virtuous king Yudhishthira to follow behind Bhima, encounter, O mighty monarch, your princely sons, all excellent car-warrior.
Beholding those warriors on that chariots resemble the sun or the fire itself in effulgence, beholding all those fierce bow-men of burning effulgence and exceeding beauty,
Then, O Bharata, Dushasana, urged those troops saying, slay him' and encompassed Satyaki there with.
Then we beheld the marvellous character of the prowess of Sini's grandson, in as much as single handed as he was he fearlessly fought on with the odds against him.
He then continually went on slaying the divisions of car-warriors elephants and horsemen and the robbers.
Those men who are possessed of learning and mercy, who are pure in body and mind, men care who are firm in truth, and who are contented with what belongs to them, succeed in ascending to Heaven.
Those men who do not bear illwell to any creature, who do not stand in need of labour for their livelihood, who bear friendly hearts towards all beings, and who entertain mercy towards all, succeed in ascending to Heaven.
Those men who have faith, who have mercy, who are holy, who scek the company of holy men, and who know the distinctions between right and wrong, succeed in ascending to Heaven.
Those men, O goddess, who know the consequences of good and bad deeds, succeed in ascending to Heaven.
Those men who are just in all their dealings, who have desirable accomplishinents, who are devoted to the deities and the Brahmanas, and who are persevering in doing all good acts, succeed in ascending to Heaven.
All these me, O goddess, succeed in ascending to Heaven through the meritorious results of their deeds. What else do you wish to hear?
Going to the lake of Pavana, which is a excellent Tirtha called Maruta and bathing there, O foremost of men, one is adored in the regions of Vayu.
Bathing in the lake of the immortals and worshipping the lord of the immortals, one is adored in the celestials region through the prowess of the immortals.
Bathing according to the ordinance in the Shalisurya of Shalihotra, O king of kings, one obtains the fruits of giving away one thousand kine.
O best of the Bharata race, bathing in the Tirtha called Srikunja in the Sarasvati, one obtains the fruits of Agnishtoma sacrifice.
Through your deeds those two heroes, viz., Bhishma and Drona, have been killed. Karna has been slain for having followed your conduct !
Requested by me, O fool, you did not, from avarice, give the Pandavas their paternal share, under the advice of Shakuni.
You gave poison to Bhimasena! You, O wicked man, tried to burn all the Pandavas with their mother at the palace of lace!
While gambling, you insulted the daughter of Yajnasena, while in her season, in the midst of assembly! Shameless as you are, you should have been killed there and then!
Through Subala's son an expert in dice, you unfairly defeated the virtuous Yudhishthira who was unskilled in gambling! For that are killed.
Through the sinful Jayadratha again, Krishna was on another occasion insulted when the Pandavas, her lords, had gone out a thunting towards the hermitage of Trinavindu! you
Causing Abhimanyu, who was a child and alone, to be surrounded by many, you did kill that hero. For this sin, O sinful wretch, you are slain!
All those sinful deeds which you attribute to us have in reality been perpetrated by you in consequence of your sinful nature!
You had never listened to the advice of Brihaspati and Ushanas! You had never respected the old! You had never heard the beneficial words!
In those forms that I assume for the purpose, I am known, O son of Bhrigu's race, in the three worlds as Vishnu and Brahman and Shakra. I am the origin and I am the destruction of all things.
I am the creator of al existent objects and I am their destroyer. Knowing no change myself, I am the destroyer of all those creatures that live in sinfulness.
In every cycle I have to repair the causeway of Virtue, entering into various kinds of wombs from desire of doing good to my creatures.
When, O son of Bhrigu's race, I live in the order of the celestials, I then indeed, act in i every respect as a celestial.
When I live in the order of the Gandharvas, I then, O son of Bhrigu's race, act in every . respect as a Gandharva.
King Vasu, O foremost of kings, was always devoted to the true religion. Although sunk deep into the bowels of the Earth, his devotion to virtue did not decrease.
Ever devoted to Narayana, and ever reciting sacred Mantras having Narayana for their god, he once more ascended to heaven through Narayana's favour.
Getting up from the bowels of the Earth, king Vasu, on account of the very highest end that he attained, proceeded to a spot which is even higher than the region of Brahman himself.”
The king said: O exalted one, tell me what was your pledge.
Your son Lakshmana and the son of Dushasana, both these foremost among men can never fly back from the battle.
The two young and delicate princes are of light hand and know all the details of fighting and are in every way fit to be leaders.
These two, O foremost among the Kurus, i am of opinion, are Rathas, and the heroes attached as they are to the duties of the Kshatriya will perform noble deeds.
That foremost among men, Dandadhara, O great king, is a Ratha and he will fight in your battle protected by his own army.
Brihadbala, too, O king, the prince of the Shalyas, is one of the best among car warriors and is a Ratha, in my opinion, of great impetuosity and prowess.
He will fight in the battle delighting his own friends, a wielder of terrible weapons as he is and a mighty bowman devoted to the good of the son of Dhritarashtra.
Kripa, the son of Sharadvata, Oking, is the general of the commanders of the Rathas, and careless of his dear life he will consume your enemies.
The son of the great Rishi Gautama, or the preceptor Sharadvata, born on a clump of health, is invincible as the war god Kartikeya himself.
Destroying this army strong in numbers and furnished with diverse weapons and bows he will roll in the battle like blazing fire.
Agni, assuming the form of a region flew away from Indra who pursued him in the form of a hawk.
The pigeon fell on the lap of the king Shivi who was seated on a costly seat.
Thereupon the priest thus spoke to the king," Afraid of the hawk, this pigeon has come to you for his life with the intention of saving it.
The learned men have said that the fall of pigeon on one's lap forebodes a great danger. The king who understands men should save himself by giving away wealth.”
Thereupon the pigeon thus spoke to the king. "Afraid of the hawk and desirous of saving my life, I have come to you for the safety of my life. I am a Rishi. Assuming now the form of a pigeon I have come to you to seek the protection of my life. I consider you my life.
The planet Rahu on account of its great bulk covers both the sun and the moon in due tiine (during eclipses). I tell you all this in brief.
O great king, with the help of the eye of science, I have told you all that you asked me. Be blessed.
I shall now tell you of the construction of the universe as narrated in the Shastras. Therefore, O descendant of Kuru, pacify your son Duryodhana.
O best of the Bharata race, hearing this delightful Bhumi Parva, a Kshatriya obtains prosperity, the fruition of all his desires and approbation of the pious.
Never before have I uttered a falschood even in just. Never have I turned back from battle. (By the merit of those deeds) let this child revive.
As virtue is dear to me, as Brahmanas are especially dear to me, let Abhimanyu's son, who is born dead, revive.
Never has a misunderstanding arisen between me and my friend Vijaya. Let this dead child revive by that truth.
As truth and virtue are always established in me, let this dead child of Abhimanyu revive.
As Kansa and Keshi have been righteously killed by me, let this child revive today by that truth.
After these words uttered by Vasudeva, that child, O foremost one of Bharata's family, became animal and began gradually to move, O king.
Salutations to you who laugh dreadfully and as loud as the beat of a drum, and who practise dreadful vows! Salutations for ever to you who are fierce, and who have ten arms.
Salutations to you who are armed with bones and who are fond of the ashes of funeral pyres. Salutation to you who are dreadful, who are horrible to look at, and who are an observer of dreadful, vows and practises.
Salutations to you who have an ugly mouth, who have a tongue resembling a scimitar and who have large teeth. Salutations to you who are fond of both cooked and uncooked meat, and who consider the gourded Vina as highly dear.
Salutations to you who make rain, who help the cause of virtue, who are identifiable with the form of Nandi, and who Righteousness's self! Salutations to you who are ever moving like wind and the other forces, who are the controller of all things, and who are always engaged in coO king all creatures. are
Salutations to you who are the foremost of all creatures, who are supperior, and who are the giver of boons. Salutation to you who have the best of garlands, the best of scents, and the best of dresses, and that givest the best of boons to the best of creatures.
Salutations to you who are attached, who are freed from all attachments, who are of the form of Yoga-contemplation, and who are bedecked with a garland of Akshas. Salutations to you who are united as cause and disunited as effects, and who are the forın of shadow and of light.
You, who are equal to Brihaspati himself in intelligence, should describe to me these duties of kings which are difficult to be ascertained and thereby resolve my doubt.
You, O foremost of men, are ever engaged in encompassing the good of our family. For this reason you always describe to us on the duties of the kings. Endued with great wisdom, Vidura also gives always valuable instruction.
Hearing instructions from you which are productive of good to our family and kingdom, I shall be able to live happily like a person pleased with having drunk the immortal nectar.
What classes of servants are to be considered as inferior and what as possessing all accomplishments? Helped by what class of servants or by servants of what kind of birth, should a king rule?
If the king choose to act alone and without servants, he can never protect his people. All persons, however, of high birth wish for the acquisition of sovereignty?
O blessed one, unadorned with ornaments and unclad in beautiful robes as you are, you beautify the forest more by your unadorned beauty.
O lady of faultless limbs, you cannot (however) look so beautiful besmeared as you are with mud and dirt as you would if adorned with ornaments and clad in gorgeous costume.
O auspicious one, becoming such why do you serve a decrepit old husband, one that has become incapable of realising pleasure,
O lady of sweet smiles, one who is in incapable of protecting and supporting u? Therefore abandoning Chyavana, accept one of us as your husband.
Making up your mind, invite your husband (from among us two). Do not spend your youth uselessly.” Having been thus addressed, Sukanya thus spoke to the celestials,
The Earth and the sky are known to extend on all sides. And because I uphold them both, therefore, am I called by the name of Adhokshaja.
Persons well-versed in the Vedas and engaged in interpreting the words used in those scriptures worship me in sacrifices by calling upon me by the same name.
In days of yore, the great Rishis, while practising severe austerities, said,-No one else in the universe, save the powerful Narayana, is capable of being called by the name of Adhokshaja.
Clarified butter which keeps up the lives of all creatures in the universe forms my effulgence. It is, therefore, that Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas and possessed of concentrated souls call me by the name of Ghritarchis.
The Voice said : O Bhadra, rise up and leave this place. I grant you this boon. O lady of sweet smiles, I shall beget offspring on you.
O beautiful featured lady, lie down with me on your bed on the eighth or the fourteenth day of the moon after the bath of your season.
Kunti said : Having been thus addressed by the invisible voice, the chaste lady (Bhadra), desirous of offspring, did as she was directed.
O best of the Bharatas, O excellent descendant of the Bharata race, that lady gave birth of three Shalvas and four Madras by that corpse."
O best of the Bharatas, you too like him beget offspring by your ascetic power.
The acts performed by a man well advised, well controlled and done in a way not injurious to any body has contrary effect by the dispensations of Providence.
Then, again, the dispensation of the gods, that are not the results of any particular actions, are neutralized by the actions of men; as for instance cold, heat and rain and hunger and thirst, O Bharata.
Over and above the actions that a man is destined to perform, he can do away with others as well at his will; which the Shastras testify.
Since, O son of Pandu, there is no other way for than action. A man should engage in acts with this knowledge; and the result will be brought about by both preordainment and action.
He who engages in action with this knowledge is not annoyed at failure; nor is he elated with success.
In this sense, O Bhimasena, did I speak; and I did not mean that in a battle with the enemy; success would be absolutely theirs.
At this, all the brothers requested Dhananjaya to do what the god said. He then threw into the waters (of the sea) both the bow and the couple of inexhaustible quivers.
After this, O chief of Bharata's race the God of Fire disappeared then and these the heroic sons of Pandu next went out with their faces turned towards the South.
Then, by the northern coast of the salt sea, those princes of Bharata's race, went to the south west.
Turning next towards the west, they saw the city of Dwraka covered by the ocean.
Turning next to the north, those foremost ones went on observant of Yoga, they were desirous of going round the whole earth.
Seeing all created things to be ihus subject to death, endued with knowledge, and thinking all things to be possessed of the same nature, I sleep in comfort with no thought to disturb me.
If I get without trouble a heavy meal I waver not to enjoy it. On the other hand, I am used to pass many days together without tasting anything.
Sometimes people feed me with luxurious edibles in profusion, sometimes with a small quantity, sometimes even with less, and sometimes I get no food at all.
O lotus-eyed one, I have heard elaborately from you the mystery of production and dissolution of things, and also about your inexhaustible greatness.
O great Lord, what you have said yourself is even so (perfectly true). I desire to see, O best of beings, your divine form.
If, O Lord, you think that I am competent to see that form, then, O Lord of mystic powers, show me your inexhaustible form.
The great One said Behold, Partha, my forms by hundreds and thousands. They are various divine, and different in colour and form.
Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Ashvins and the Maruts. Behold, 0 Bharata, innumerable wonders, not seen by you before.
Behold, Gudakesha, the entire universe of movable and immovable and whatever else you wish to see, all collected together in my this body.
But you are not fit to see Me with your these eyes. Therefore, I give you divine sight. Behold now my great mystic nature.
Not by the study of the Vedas, not by penances, gifts or sacrifices, can I be seen in this form of mine which you have seen.
O Arjuna, he who does everything for Me, who has only Me for his supreme objects, who has only Me for his supreme objects, who is freed from all attachments and who is without enmity towards any beings, comes to Me.
Vaishampayana said: Thereupon on beholding Bhimasena and Arjuna, the Kshatriyas, inflated, sent up a terrible shout in that forest.
These two best among men are mighty, inveterate in their hatred and smiters (of enemies); they are the foremost among the Gandharis, young, handsome and endued with great strength.
But this one who is ever your dear friend, who vaunts of bravery in battle and who encourages you, O king in your dispute with the Pandavas,
This man vain and mean, Karna, the son of Vikartana, who is your adviser guide and friend, and who has been placed in too elevated a position by you,
Stricken with great sorrow, his wife is weeping bitterly at sight of his arms covered with blood, which, however, formerly used to be smeared with sandal-paste.
Indeed, the beautiful lady exclaims,-Even now adorned with beautiful palms and fingers, these two arins of yours resemble a couple of spiked maces, entering into whose clasp joy never felt me for a moment.
How shall I fare, O king, when I am deprived of you.-Possessing a sweet voice, the Kamvoja queen is weeping helplessly and trembling with emotion.
Look at that bevy of fair ladies there. Although tired with toil and worn out with heat, yet beauty does not leave them like the beauty of the garlands worn by the celestials although exposed to the Sun.
Behold, O destroyer of Madhu, the heroic king of the Kalingas lying there on the ground, with his mighty arms bedecked with a couple of Angadas.
Behold, O Janarddana, those Magadha ladies crying and standing around Jayastsena the king of the Magadhas.
The charming and sweet cries of those large-eyed and sweet-voiced damsels, O Krishna, are stupefying my heart greatly.
Having all their ornaments displaced, crying, and stricken with sorrow, alas, those ladies of Magadha, worthy of sleeping on costly beds, are now lying down on the naked earth.
Surrounding their lord, the king of the Kosalas, viz., prince Vrihadvala, those other ladies are crying aloud.
Engaged in taking out from his person the with which it was pierced by Abhimanyu with the full force of his arms, those ladies are again and again losing their consciousness.
The faces of those beautiful damsels, O Madhava, exhausted with toil and scorched by thc rays of the Sun, are appearing like faded lotuses.
arrows There, the brave sons of Dhrishtadyurnna, young in age, and bedecked with garlands of gold and beautiful Angadas, are lying, killed by Drona.
Like insects on a burning fire, they have all been consumed by falling upon Drona whose car was the chamber of fire, having the bow for its flames and arrows and darts and maces for its fuel.
Likewise, the five brave Kekaya brothers, adorned with beautiful Angadas, are lying on effort killed by Drona and with their faces turned towards that hero.
Their coats of mail, stinging like molten gold, and their tall standards and cars and garlands all made of gold, are shedding a bright lustre on the Earth like so many burning fires.
Look, O Madhava, at king Drupada overthrown in battle by Drona, like mighty elephant in the forest killed by a huge lion.
The bright and white umbrella, of the king of the Panchalas, shines, O lotus-eyed one, like the moon in the autumnal sky.
Having burnt his body on the funeral pyre, the daughter-in-law and the wives of the old king, stricken with sorrow, are proceeding, keeping the pyre to their right.
There, those ladies, beside themselves with sorrow, are removing the brave and great bowman, viz., Dhrishtaketu, that foremost of the Chedis, killed by Drona.
Mark the reverses created by Time. Those leading warriors who could slay the very celestials by force of their arms have themselves been killed.
forsooth, O Madhava, there is nothing difficult for destiny to bring about, since these leading men, these heroes, have been killed by Kshatriya warriors!
I considered by energetic sons as slain even then, O Krishna, when you came back unsuccessful to Upaplavya!
Shantanu's son and wise Vidura told me then, — withdraw your love for your children.
The interviews of those persons could never be useless. Soon, O Janarddana, have my sons been reduced to ashes!'
The Pandava king then consoled those women, who had lost their heroic husbands and sons in the battle, with profuse gifts of wealth.
Having recovered his kingdom, Yudhishthira caused himself to be duly installed on the throne. That foremost of men then assured all his subjects by various deeds of good will.
That foremost of righteous men set himself to acquire the substantial blessings of the Brahmanas, of the foremost inilitary officers, and the leading citizens.
Having passed fifty nights in the capital, the blessed monarch recollected the time indicated by his grandfather as the hour of his departure from this world.
Accompanied by a number of priests he then left the city of Hastinapur having seen that the sun ceasing to go southwards, had begun to proceed in his northward course.
The remnant of unslain warriors, and all the denizens of Kurujangala, are also here, Opening the eyes, O chief of Kuru's race, do you see them.
Whatever should be done on this occasion have all been arranged and provided for by me. Indeed, at this hour which you hadst spoken of, all things have been kept in readiness.
Vaishampayana said Thus addressed by the highly intelligent Kunti's son the son, of Ganga opened his eyes and all the Bharatas assembled there and stood around him.
The mighty Bhishma then, taking the strong hand of Yudhishthira, addressed hiin, in a voice deep as that of the clouds.
By good luck, O son of Kunti, you have come here with all your counsellors, O Yudhishthira. The thousandrayed maker of day, the holy Sun, has begun his northward course.
I have been lying on my bed here for fiftycight nights. Stretched these on shai ppointed arrows, I have felt this period to be as long as if it was a century.
O Yuthishthira, the lunar month of Magha has come. This is, again, the lighted fortnight and a fourth part of it ought by this (according to my calculations) be over.
Having said so to Yudhishthira the son of Dharma, Ganga's son Bhishma then saluted Dhritarashtra and said to him as follows.
Bhishma said O king, you know well the duties. All your doubts, again, relating to the science of wealth, have been well solved. You have served many learned Brahmanas.
You know the subtile sciences connected with the Vedas, all the duties of religion, O king, and the whole of the four Vedas.
You should not grieve, therefore, O son of Kuru. That which was preordained has come to pass. It could not be otherwise. You have heard the mysteries relating to the deities from the lips of the Islandborn Rishi himself.
Yuthishthira and his brothers are morally as much your sons as are the sons of Pandu. Following the duties of religion, cherish and protect them. In their turn, they are always devoted to the service of their elders.
King Yudhishthira, the just, is pure souled. He will always be obedient to you. I know that he is given to the virtue of mercy or abstention from injury. He is devoted to his elders and preceptors.
Your sons wore all wickedsouled. They were full of anger and cupidity. Overwhelmed by envy they were all of wicked conduct. You should not grieve for them.
Vaishampayana said Having said this much to Dhritarashtra of great wisdom, the Kuru chief then addressed Vasudeva of great arms.
O holy one, O god of all gods O you adored by all the deities and Asuras, O you who didst cover the three worlds with three steps of thine, I bow unto thee, O wielder of the conch, the discus, and the mace.
You are Vasudeva, you are of golden body, you are the one Purusha (or active agent), you are the creator (of the universe), You are of huge proportions. You are sentiency. You are subtle. You are the Supreme and Eternal Soul.
In the absence of king's protection, all things, filled with fear and anxiety and becoming senseless and uttering cries of misery would be ruined in no time.
No sacrifices extending for a year and finished with presents according to the ordinance would take place if the king did not observe the duty of protection.
In the absence of king's protection Brahmanas would never study the four Vedas or practise austerities or be purified by knowledge and rigid vows.
In the absence of king's protection the destroyer of a person guilty of Brahmanicide would not get any reward; rather the person. Guilty of Brahmanicide, would would not be punished. an
In the absence of king's protection, men would take away other people's wealth from their very hands, and all healthy restrictions would be abolished, and everybody, stricken with, fear would seek safety in flight.
In the absence of king's protection, all kinds of injustice would commence; intermixture of castes would occur; and famine would devastate the kingdom.
Again by virtue of royal protection, men can everywhere sleep fearlessly at their ease without shutting their houses and doors with bolts and bars.
Nobody would stand the evil words of others far less assaults, if the king did not righteously protect the Earth.
If the king observes the duty of protection, women adorned with ornaments may fearlessly walk about everywhere without male relatives to guard them.
Men become righteous and without injuring serve one another because the king observes the duty of protection.
By virtue of royal protection the members of the three castes can celebrate high sacrifices and engage themselves in the acquisition of learning with attention.
The world depends upon agriculture and trade and is protected by the Vedas. All these again are duly protected by the king exercising his principal duty.
Since the king, taking a heavy burden upon himself, protects his subjects with the help of a mighty force, it is therefore that the people are able to live in happiness.
Who is there who will not worship him on whose existence depends the existence of the people and by whose destruction the people are destroyed?
That person who does what is agreeable and beneficial to the king and who participates in the burden of kingly duties which fill every caste with fear, conquers both this and the other world.
That man who even thinks of injuring the king, forsooth meets with grief here and goes to hell hereafter.
No one should obey the king by taking him for a man, for he is in sooth a great god in human form.
The king puts on five different forms according to five different occasions. He energy the becomes Agni, Aditya, Mrityu, Vaishravana, and Yama.
When the king, imposed on by falsehood, consumes with his dreadful offenders before him, he is said to put on the form of Agni.
When he marks through his spies the acts of all persons and does what is for the general behoof, he is said to put on the form of Aditya.
When he kills in anger hundreds of wicked men with their sons, grandsons, and relatives, he is then said to put on the form of the Destroyer.
When he suppresses the the wicked by punishing them severely and favours the righteous by giving them rewards, he is then said to put on the form of Yama.
Those, who take wealth belonging to the king, sink senseless into a deep hell of eternal darkness and infamy.
Who is there who will not adore the king who is described by terms,–'delighter of the people,' 'bestower of happiness, possessor of prosperity, the best of all, healer of injuries, master of Earth,' and protector of men?
That man, therefore, who seeks his own prosperity, who satisfies all healthy restraints, who has his soul under control, who has subdued his passions, who is gifted with intelligence and memory, and who is a clever (business man), should always be attached to the king.
The king should duly honour the minister who is grateful, wise, large-hearted loyal, a master of his senses, virtuous, and observant of the dictates of policy.
The king should entertain the man who is loyal, grateful, virtuous, self-controlled, brave, noble, and competent to complete works without the help of others.
If he could ascribe either of them to the work of Destiny, he would then be indifferent w either happiness or misery as they fall to his share,
Though your mind is freed of desire, yet you bear a heavy burden. You do not strive to accomplish your own good. Are you not successful in subduing your mind?
Having renounced home and coveted wealth, if you go about, you shall then know what is real happiness. One who is shorn of everything, sleeps soundly and rises happily.
Abject poverty, in this world, is the road to happiness. It is the safest way, it leads to the source of all blessings, and the path is not beset with any peril. Persons cherishing desire, cannot reach this goal (but those who have ridden over their desire, can easily do so.
Therefore, becoming indifferent to all worldly attachments i.e., for children and wives) together with all fleeting phantons (as the physical body, etc.,) one should , helped by his intelligence, treat himself with proper medicine for the cure of those painful afflictions.
Without Renunciation one can never be happiness. Without Renunciation one never be successful in gaining what is his highest good. Without Renunciation one can never be at his ease even in sleep. Therefore, renouncing every thing, makc happiness your can Own.
A Brahmana, told me all this, at Hastinapur, in times gone by, about what Champaka had sung. I hold Renunciation, therefore, as the foremost of things.
Sanjaya said Thereafter that illustrious scion of the Vrishni race, the high-souled and intelligent Satyaki, having slain Sudarsana in battle, addressing charioteer thus spoke.
Having crossed the almost uncrossable ocean of Drona's division abounding with chariots and steeds and elephants-ocean of which the waves are constituted by arrows and darts, fishes by swords and scimitars and alligators by the maccs; which roars with the whizz of arrows and the clash of diverse weapons, an ocean that is fierce and destructive of life and resounds with the din created by diverse musical instruments; of which the touch is disagreeable and unbearable to warriors longing to have victory and of which the banks infested by flesh-eaters represented by the forces of Jalasandha, I consider that the remaining of the array yet to be crossed, can be crossed with great ease, like a stream-let of shallow water. Therefore do you dauntlessly drive the steeds forwards.
I think I am now within a hand's distance from Savyasachin. Having vanquished in are battle, the indomitable Drona together with his followers.
To the spot (I repeat) where yonder warriors headed by Duryodhana, their hands defended by leathern gloves, are standing with their faces turned towards me and inspired with the resolution of encountering me.
Consider me, O charioteer as already passed through this dreadful strong-hold, having slain in battle all these warriors and cars, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers that are among them.